\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename cl-git.info
@settitle Libgit2 Bindings for Common Lisp
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* cl-git: (cl-git). Libgit2 Bindings for Common Lisp
@end direntry

@copying
cl-git a Common Lisp interface to git repositories.
Copyright @copyright{} 2011, 2012 Russell Sim @email{russell.sim@@gmail.com}.

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of
the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with this program.  If not, see
@url{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/}.
@end copying


@finalout
@setcontentsaftertitlepage

@titlepage
@title CL-git
@subtitle Libgit2 bindings for Common Lisp
@author Russel Sim
@author Willem Rein Oudshoorn
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@include include/sb-texinfo.texinfo

@node Top, Overview, (dir), (dir)
@top Introduction

This library wraps the C library libgit2.  As the name implies it deals with git
and allows you to create/examine and alter git repositories programmatically.

Some knowledge if git is required to make sense of all the concepts.  Also this
being a wrapper around the libgit2 library, the documentation libgit2, which can be found
at @url{http://libgit2.github.com/libgit2/#HEAD} is very help full.

@contents

@menu
* Overview::
* Installation::
* Example::
* CLOS Interface::
* Reference By Class::
* Functions::
* Function Index::
@end menu

@node Overview, Installation, Top, Top
@chapter Overview

Libgit2 exposes through a C-API basically an object oriented interface.
The CL-GIT project takes advantage of that and provides a mostly object
oriented interface to libgit2.  Git concepts such as commits, tags,
blobs etc are exposed as instances of corresponding classes.  However
besides the wrapping into objects most of the libgit2 functions are
almost directly translated into lisp functions, and the libgit2
documentation is still very relevant. 

In @ref{CLOS Interface} some more details on how the libgit2 concepts
are mapped into lisp can be found.  And a complete supported list of
functions can be found near the end in @ref{Functions}.  More
convenient is the list of functions per type of object you are dealing
with.  Those can be found in @ref{Reference By Class}.

@node Installation, Example, Overview, Top
@chapter Installation

You need to download CL-git from github at either
@url{http://github.com/russell/cl-git} or
@url{http://github.com/woudshoo/cl-git}.  

In addition you need a recent version of the libgit2 library, which can
be found at @url{http://github.com/libgit2/libgit2}.

The versions this manual is tested with are the
@url{http://github.com/woudshoo/cl-git} version and version 0.17 of
libgit2.

The libgit2 library should be installed as usual, per the libgit2 documentation,
and the cl-git package should be downloaded into a place that ASDF can find it.

The dependencies for CL-git itself are: cffi, local-time, cl-fad, trivial-garbage, anaphora.
The tests in package cl-git-tests, need in addition to cl-git the following packages: FiveAM, unix-options, inferior-shell.
In order to build this documentation, a fully working texinfo environment should be present and
the package sb-texinfo.


@node Example, CLOS Interface, Installation, Top
@chapter Example Using CL-GIT 

@section Listing References

Lets start simple, we are going to list all the references present in a
repository.  For this we first have to open a repository with
@lisp
> (git-repository-open "/Users/woudshoo/Development/Source/Lisp/cl-git/")
#<CL-GIT::REPOSITORY @{100422BFD3@}>
@end lisp

This returns a repository.  Getting a list of references is easy.
@lisp
> (cl-git:git-reference-list :repository *)
("refs/heads/convert-to-classes" "refs/heads/gh-pages" "refs/heads/master"
  ...                                 
 "refs/tags/my-working-version")
@end lisp

Because the repository is a libgit2 construct, it needs to be freed. 
We can do this explicitly with the the generic @code{git-free} function like this
@lisp
> (cl-git:git-free **)
nil
@end lisp
Or we can wait until the garbage collector comes around to do this for us.

Now a better way of doing this is with the convenience macro @code{with-repository}
which opens the repository, sets the special variable @code{*git-repository*} which holds
the current (default) repository, and executes a body of code.   Like this:
@lisp
> (with-repository ("/Users/woudshoo/Development/Source/Lisp/cl-git/")
     (git-reference-list))
("refs/heads/convert-to-classes" "refs/heads/gh-pages"
  ... )
@end lisp

@section Inspecting a Single Commit

Now suppose we know the hash of a commit we can get to this commit as follows:
@lisp
> (setf *repo* (cl-git:git-repository-open 
                  "/Users/woudshoo/Development/Source/Lisp/wo-git-gui/"))

#<CL-GIT::REPOSITORY @{10083E86C3@}>

> (setf *commit* (cl-git:git-lookup "6a9840f959df6301cba1acbc560b960a6a2787d6" 
                    :repository *repo*))
#<CL-GIT::COMMIT @{10084FA0B3@}>
@end lisp

Now we can inspect this commit to get the commit message and the author:

@lisp
> (cl-git:git-message *commit*)
"Started to write some documentation
"
> (cl-git:git-author *commit*)
(:NAME "Willem Rein Oudshoorn" :EMAIL "woudshoo+github@@xs4all.nl" :TIME
 @@2012-05-06T18:46:35.000000+02:00)
@end lisp

Or we can see what is parents are,

@lisp
> (cl-git:git-parentcount *commit*)
1
> (cl-git:git-parent-oids *commit*)
(706478223342774799146743734860864842687841202176)
@end lisp

What is important to notice here is that the result of
@code{git-parent-oids} is a list of numbers.  These numbers are the same
as the SHA-1 hashes you normally see in git, except displayed, in base
10.  The SHA-1 that are displayed in by the git command line tools are
normally written in base 16.  CL-git uses numbers to identify the
commits etc.  But you can lookup objects with the base 16 SHA strings,
as we did above.  This works because if a SHA-1 hash is expected and a
string is supplied, CL-git converts the string to an integer by reading
it in base 16.

@subsection The Content of A Commit

To see what is in the commit we can get the tree out of the commit with

@lisp
> (cl-git:git-tree *commit*)
#<CL-GIT::TREE @{1007DFF9B3@}>
> (cl-git:git-entries *)
((:ATTR 33188 :FILENAME ".gitignore" :FILENAME-LENGTH 10 :OID
  1166326251727089714911644542196064058758301591936 :REMOVED 0)
 (:ATTR 33188 :FILENAME "AUTHORS" :FILENAME-LENGTH 7 :OID
  241890539580627595024686576348750077422898574058 :REMOVED 0)
...
 (:ATTR 16384 :FILENAME "src" :FILENAME-LENGTH 3 :OID
  1088911882924495776433938337720561272818465626581 :REMOVED 0)
...)
@end lisp
So this gives you a list of files and directories in the commit.  Note
that this gives only the top level entries, you need to traverse sub
directories yourself.  In the example above @code{src} is a directory,
which you can tell by interpreting the @code{:ATTR} value.  The meaning
of the attribute flag is the same as in C and the flags are defined in
@file{/usr/include/cpio.h} ad @file{/usr/include/sys/stat.h}.  For us
the important thing to know is that 16384 (= @code{#8R40000}) indicates
it is a directory.

Before we dive into this, we can get the content of the .gitignore file 
by extracting the OID, @code{1166326251727089714911644542196064058758301591936}
and lookup this object:

@lisp
> (cl-git:git-lookup 1166326251727089714911644542196064058758301591936 
                    :repository *repo*)
#<CL-GIT::BLOB @{1006DB3943@}>
@end lisp

A blob is just raw data, stored as raw bytes.  Basically everything
in the git database is stored as blobs.  
So to extract the content we can do
@lisp
> (cl-git:git-raw-content *)
#(42 126 10 42 46 102 97 115 108 10 10 47 100 111 99 47 101 103 103 115 47 10
  47 100 111 99 47 100 111 99 116 114 101 101 115 47 10 47 100 111 99 47 104
  116 109 108 47 10 47 100 111 99 47 98 105 110 47 10 47 100 111 99 47 46 105
  110 115 116 97 108 108 101 100 46 99 102 103 10 47 100 111 99 47 77 97 107
  101 102 105 108 101 10 47 100 111 99 47 109 97 107 ...)
@end lisp

And to convert it to a string you can do the following (however this is only likely
to work for ASCII).

@lisp
CL-USER> (map 'string #'code-char *)
"*~
*.fasl

/doc/eggs/
......"
@end lisp

For proper decoding you should use your favorite method, e.g. use babel.

@subsection Sub Directories

As mentioned before, you can see from the attribute directory if an
entry in the tree is a sub directory.  The way to access a sub directory
is by looking up the OID from the entry.  For this example we take the
OID from the @file{src} entry in the section above.

@lisp
> (cl-git:git-lookup  1088911882924495776433938337720561272818465626581
                      :repository *repo*)
#<CL-GIT::TREE @{10078100B3@}>
@end lisp

Now notice that we knew beforehand that this was a directory because the
@code{:ATTR} was @code{#8R40000}, but we can also tell it was a sub directory
because the return value for looking up the entry is a a tree object.

This tree object has entries, containing the files and sub directories
of the @file{src} directory of the git project.

And we can repeat the same inspection, lookup etc as in the previous
section.


@node CLOS Interface, Reference By Class, Example, Top
@chapter CLOS Interface

The interface exposed by libgit2 is basically an object oriented
interface, but expressed in C.  The CLOS interface of cl-git combines
the myriad of functions back into an object oriented structure.

@menu
* Function Name Mapping::
* Object Hierarchy::
* Memory Management::
@end menu

@node  Function Name Mapping, Object Hierarchy, CLOS Interface, CLOS Interface
@section Function Name Mapping

The mapping from libgit2 names to generic functions is roughly as follows,
take the libgit2 name such as @code{git_commit_message}, replace the underscore with a hyphen
and remove the specific type of object, in this case @samp{commit}.  This yields
in this case @code{git-message} and that is the generic function name.

@node Object Hierarchy, Memory Management, Function Name Mapping, CLOS Interface
@section Object Hierarchy

The object hierarchy for objects in the git database is very simple,
there is one root class called @code{object} and all other objects are
sub classes, one level deep, of this class.  The sub classes are:

@itemize
@item commit
@item tag
@item tree
@item blob (not implemented yet)
@end itemize

There are also objects that are not stored in the git database, such as

@itemize
@item reference
@item index
@item repository
@item config
@end itemize

These items are root classes and do not inherit from @code{object}.

@node Memory Management,  , Object Hierarchy, CLOS Interface
@section Memory Management

Because C has manual memory management and Lisp automatic memory
management there is the question on how these two systems integrate.

First most libgit2 objects need to be freeed.  There are different free calls in libgit2, but 
in CL-git they are all replaced by @code{git-free}.  

Second of all, this call is made optional. The package
@samp{trivial-garbage} takes care of freeing the object when the garbage
collector collects the Lisp git object wrappers. 

So normally you do not have to call the free explicitly.  However there
are a few reasons you might want to do it anyway:

@itemize
@item Having a repository and commit objects open has the
      side effect that file descriptors to the underlying git files stay open.
      When you iterate over may commits manually (not using the convience macros)
      can trigger the Lisp process to run out of available file handles.
@item Some libgit2 calls can potentially allocate lots of memory.
      Because the Lisp garbage collector does not see the memory
      allocated by the libgit2 library, it helps to call the
      @code{git-free} call to avoid usage build up.
@end itemize

@section Dependend Objects

Some objects, such as commits, are only valid as long as another object
is valid, like a repository.  This means that as soon as a repository is
@code{git-free}'ed the commit becomes invalid.  Also conversely, as long
as we keep a reference to a commit and we expect that one to be valid,
the repository can not be collected.  We call the commit the depend object and
the repository the facilitating object.

These dependencies are handled in CL-git in the following way:

@itemize
@item When a facilitating object is explicitly freed, or when a convenience macro
such as @code{with-repository} frees the object because the execution path leaves scope, 
all dependend objects on that facilitating object are freed.
@item Any depenend object holds a reference to its facilitator as long as it is not freed.
@end itemize

The consequences are that the following is not correct
@lisp
(with-git-repository (..)
   (git-lookup ...))
@end lisp
Because the returned object from the lookup call is not valid anymore
because the repository is closed.

However the following, although uncertain when the repository is closed, is correct
@lisp
(git-lookup ... :repository (git-repository-open ...))
@end lisp



@node Reference By Class, Functions, CLOS Interface, Top
@chapter Reference By Class

@menu
* Object::
* Commit::
* Tag::
* Tree::
* Blob::
* Config::
* Reference::
* Index::
* Repository::
@end menu

@node Object, Commit, Reference By Class, Reference By Class
@section Object

@table @code
@item git-id
@xref{Generic-Function git-id}
@item git-lookup
@xref{Generic-Function git-lookup}
@item git-type
@xref{Generic-Function git-type}
@end table

@node Commit, Tag, Object, Reference By Class
@section Commit

@table @code
@item git-author
@xref{Generic-Function git-author}
@item git-committer
@xref{Generic-Function git-committer}
@item git-id
@xref{Generic-Function git-id}
@item git-lookup
@xref{Generic-Function git-lookup}
@item git-message
@xref{Generic-Function git-message}
@item git-parent-oid
@xref{Generic-Function git-parent-oid}
@item git-parentcount
@xref{Generic-Function git-parentcount}
@item git-tree
@xref{Generic-Function git-tree}
@item git-type
@xref{Generic-Function git-type}
@item make-commit
@xref{Function make-commit}
@end table


@node Tag, Tree, Commit, Reference By Class
@section Tag

@table @code
@item git-id
@xref{Generic-Function git-id}
@item git-lookup
@xref{Generic-Function git-lookup}
@item git-message
@xref{Generic-Function git-message}
@item git-name
@xref{Generic-Function git-name}
@item git-tagger
@xref{Generic-Function git-tagger}
@item git-target
@xref{Generic-Function git-target}
@item git-type
@xref{Generic-Function git-type}
@end table


@node  Tree, Blob, Tag, Reference By Class
@section Tree

@table @code
@item git-entry-count
@xref{Generic-Function git-entry-count}
@item git-id
@xref{Generic-Function git-id}
@item git-entry-by-index
@xref{Generic-Function git-entry-by-index}
@item git-oid-from-index
@xref{Function git-oid-from-index}
@item git-lookup
@xref{Generic-Function git-lookup}
@item git-type
@xref{Generic-Function git-type}
@end table


@node Blob, Config, Tree, Reference By Class
@section Blob

@table @code
@item git-id
@xref{Generic-Function git-id}
@item git-lookup
@xref{Generic-Function git-lookup}
@item git-raw-size
@xref{Function git-raw-size}
@item git-raw-content
@xref{Function git-raw-content}
@item git-type
@xref{Generic-Function git-type}
@end table


@node  Config, Reference, Blob, Reference By Class
@section Config

@table @code
@item git-values
@xref{Generic-Function git-values}
@end table

@node  Reference, Index, Config, Reference By Class
@section Reference

@table @code
@item git-reference-lookup
@xref{Function git-reference-lookup}
@item git-resolve
@xref{Function git-resolve}
@item git-reference-list
@xref{Function git-reference-list}
@item git-reference-create
@xref{Function git-reference-create}
@item git-reference-oid
@xref{Function git-reference-oid}
@end table


@node  Index, Repository, Reference, Reference By Class
@section Index

All these functions need to be changed to take an explicit index.
If that is down, it allows us to rename the functions to simpler names.

@table @code
@item git-index-add
@xref{Function git-index-add}
@item git-index-clear
@xref{Function git-index-clear}
@item git-index-write
@xref{Function git-index-write}
@item with-repository-index
@xref{Macro with-repository-index}
@end table



@node Repository,  , Index, Reference By Class
@section Repository

@table @code
@item ensure-repository-exist
@xref{Function ensure-repository-exist}
@item git-repository-config
@xref{Function git-repository-config}
@item git-repository-open
@xref{Function git-repository-open}
@item with-repository
@xref{Macro with-repository}
@end table




@c @node Low Level Functions, Functions, Reference By Class, Top
@c @chapter Low Level Functions

@c These functions mostly call directly the underlying C function and
@c the code in the CLOS interface is build on top of this.
@c They should normally not be called and this section
@c is only here to document functions that might still be useful (or are accidentally exported).



@node Functions, Function Index, Reference By Class, Top
@chapter Functions


@include include/fun-cl-git-ensure-repository-exist.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-author.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-committer.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-config-free.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-entries.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-entry-by-index.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-entry-count.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-id.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-index-add.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-index-write.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-index-clear.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-lookup.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-message.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-name.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-object-free.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-oid-from-index.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-parent-oid.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-parent-oids.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-parentcount.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-raw-content.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-raw-size.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-reference-create.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-reference-list.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-reference-lookup.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-reference-oid.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-resolve.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-tagger.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-target.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-tree.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-values.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-make-commit.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-repository-config.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-git-repository-open.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-revision-walk.texinfo
@include include/fun-cl-git-walker-next.texinfo
@include include/macro-cl-git-bind-git-commits.texinfo
@include include/macro-cl-git-with-git-revisions.texinfo
@include include/macro-cl-git-with-repository-index.texinfo
@include include/macro-cl-git-with-repository.texinfo


@c @include include/method-cl-git-git-author-nil-commit-commit.texinfo
@c @include include/method-cl-git-git-message-nil-commit-commit.texinfo
@c @include include/method-cl-git-git-parent-oid-nil-commit-commit-index.texinfo
@c @include include/method-cl-git-git-parentcount-nil-commit-commit.texinfo
@c @include include/method-cl-git-git-tree-nil-commit-commit.texinfo

@node Function Index,  , Functions, Top
@appendix Function Index

@printindex fn

@bye

@c  LocalWords:  CLOS API ASDF ATTR FILENAME OID
