Commits
=======

.. cl:package:: cl-git

.. cl:type:: commit

.. cl:function:: make-commit

.. cl:macro:: bind-git-commits

.. cl:method:: git-parentcount commit

.. cl:method:: git-message commit

.. cl:method:: git-author commit

.. cl:method:: git-committer commit

.. cl:method:: git-parent-oid commit common-lisp:t

.. cl:method:: git-lookup :commit common-lisp:t

Creating
--------


Finding
-------

There are a few ways to find commits in the repository, the easiest is
to find a commit when we know the SHA-1 has. In that case the process
is as follows:

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (setf *repo* (cl-git:git-open :repository
                     "/Users/woudshoo/Development/Source/Lisp/cl-git/"))
   
   #<CL-GIT:REPOSITORY 94676D0 {10081A6903}>

   > (setf *commit* (cl-git:git-lookup :object
                       "6a9840f959df6301cba1acbc560b960a6a2787d6"
                       :repository *repo*))
   #<CL-GIT:COMMIT 7915080 {1008732463}>

Note that although we are looking up a commit we specify as class
:object. The advantage of specifying :object instead of :commit is
that you do not need to know that the SHA refers to a commit. If the
SHA refers to a tag a tag will be returned.

However if we do not know the SHA-1 but we do know a reference, such
as a branch name or tag. We can get to the commit in a slightly more
cumbersome way. (A list of references is easy to get, see the previous
section.)

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-lookup :reference "refs/heads/master" :repository *repo*)
   #<CL-GIT:REFERENCE 9468390 {1008AB5263}>

However to get from a reference to a commit is a bit of work. First of
all there are two basic kind of references. Symbolic references and
OID references. Symbolic references hold a string naming another
reference. OID references hold an OID (not an object!). So to
correctly get to an object (not necessarily a commit) in the git
repository you have to first follow the chain of symbolic references
until you get to a OID reference. Secondly, take the OID from the
reference and thirdly look up the reference.

The whole process is like this:

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-resolve *)
   #<CL-GIT:REFERENCE 812C070 {1008B926D3}>
   > (cl-git:git-reference-oid *)
   1449567594127912097590291965092159144580443086963
   > (cl-git:git-lookup :object * :repository *repo*)
   #<CL-GIT:COMMIT 812C500 {1008D5D1D3}>

In this case we ended up with a commit, however a reference can refer
to any object in the git database, so tags, blobs and trees are also
possible.

Now in normal use you do not see references to blobs or trees very
frequently, but references to tags are more common.

So in normal code you have to check for that and act accordingly.

NOTE: Need to write convenience functions so it follows the chain to
commits etc.

Walking
-------

.. cl:function:: revision-walk

.. cl:macro:: with-git-revisions

   .. code-block:: common-lisp

      CL-GIT> (with-git-repository (#p"/home/russell/projects/cl-git/")
                (with-git-revisions (commit :sha "69fec1d5938a0c1c8c14a3a120936aa8937af163")
                  (princ (git-commit-message commit))))
      added git str to oid
      added some lowlevel methods for revtree walking
      added error condition strings
      added repository open and list all refs
      initial commit
      NIL

Inspecting
----------

If we have found a commit and assinged it *commit* we can inspect this
object to find out various bits of information.

First we get the commit message and author as follows:

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-message *commit*)
   "Started to write some documentation
   "
   > (cl-git:git-author *commit*)
   (:NAME "Willem Rein Oudshoorn" :EMAIL "woudshoo+github@xs4all.nl" :TIME
    @2012-05-06T18:46:35.000000+02:00)

Or we can see what is parents are,

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-parentcount *commit*)
   1
   > (cl-git:git-parent-oids *commit*)
   (706478223342774799146743734860864842687841202176)

What is important to notice here is that the result of git-parent-oids
is a list of numbers. These numbers are the same as the SHA-1 hashes
you normally see in git, except displayed, in base 10. The SHA-1 that
are displayed in by the git command line tools are normally written in
base 16. CL-git uses numbers to identify the commits etc. But you can
lookup objects with the base 16 SHA strings, as we did above. This
works because if a SHA-1 hash is expected and a string is supplied,
CL-git converts the string to an integer by reading it in base 16.

If we have found a commit and assinged it *commit* we can inspect this
object to find out information.

First we get the commit message and author as follows:

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-message *commit*)
   "Started to write some documentation
   "
   > (cl-git:git-author *commit*)
   (:NAME "Willem Rein Oudshoorn" :EMAIL "woudshoo+github@xs4all.nl" :TIME
    @2012-05-06T18:46:35.000000+02:00)

Or we can see what is parents are,

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-parentcount *commit*)
   1
   > (cl-git:git-parent-oids *commit*)
   (706478223342774799146743734860864842687841202176)

What is important to notice here is that the result of git-parent-oids
is a list of numbers. These numbers are the same as the SHA-1 hashes
you normally see in git, except displayed, in base 10. The SHA-1 that
are displayed in by the git command line tools are normally written in
base 16. CL-git uses numbers to identify the commits etc. But you can
lookup objects with the base 16 SHA strings, as we did above. This
works because if a SHA-1 hash is expected and a string is supplied,
CL-git converts the string to an integer by reading it in base 16.
3.3.1 The Content of A Commit

To see what is in the commit we can get the tree out of the commit
with

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-tree *commit*)
   #<CL-GIT:TREE 812BDA0 {1009C89393}>
   > (cl-git:git-entries *)
   ((:ATTR 33188 :FILENAME ".gitignore" :FILENAME-LENGTH 10 :OID
     1166326251727089714911644542196064058758301591936 :REMOVED 0)
    (:ATTR 33188 :FILENAME "AUTHORS" :FILENAME-LENGTH 7 :OID
     241890539580627595024686576348750077422898574058 :REMOVED 0)
   ...
    (:ATTR 16384 :FILENAME "src" :FILENAME-LENGTH 3 :OID
     229929308993846155940317335928954649878590463873 :REMOVED 0)
   ...)

So this gives you a list of files and directories in the commit. Note
that this gives only the top level entries, you need to traverse sub
directories yourself. In the example above src is a directory, which
you can tell by interpreting the :ATTR value. The meaning of the
attribute flag is the same as in C and the flags are defined in
/usr/include/cpio.h ad /usr/include/sys/stat.h. For us the important
thing to know is that 16384 (= #8R40000) indicates it is a directory.


And to convert it to a string you can do the following (however this is only likely to work for ASCII).

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   CL-USER> (map 'string #'code-char *)
   "*~
   *.fasl
   
   /doc/eggs/
   ......"

For proper decoding you should use your favorite method, e.g. use
babel. 

Sub Directories
...............

As mentioned before, you can see from the attribute directory if an
entry in the tree is a sub directory. The way to access a sub
directory is by looking up the OID from the entry. For this example we
take the OID from the src entry in the section above.

.. code-block:: common-lisp-repl

   > (cl-git:git-lookup :object
                         229929308993846155940317335928954649878590463873
                         :repository *repo*)
   #<CL-GIT:TREE 812D4D0 {100A22AA93}>

Now notice that we knew beforehand that this was a directory because
the :ATTR was #8R40000, but we can also tell it was a sub directory
because the return value for looking up the entry is a a tree object.

This tree object has entries, containing the files and sub directories
of the src directory of the git project.

And we can repeat the same inspection, lookup etc as in the previous
section.
